# LifeLU Reading Group

This repository contains announcements and materials for the LifeLU reading group, which presents works related to protein understanding.

## Next Meeting

**Presenter:** Özlem Şimşek

**Date:** 7 November 2024, 10:00 UTC+3 (Istanbul)

**Paper:** [Combining protein sequences and structures with transformers and equivariant graph neural networks to predict protein function] (https://academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/article/39/Supplement_1/i318/7210446?login=false)

**Citation:** Boadu, F., Cao, H., & Cheng, J. (2023). Combining protein sequences and structures with transformers and equivariant graph neural networks to predict protein function. Bioinformatics, 39, i318–i325.

**Abstract:**

Motivation: Millions of protein sequences have been generated by numerous genome and transcriptome sequencing projects. However,
experimentally determining the function of the proteins is still a time consuming, low-throughput, and expensive process, leading to a large
protein sequence-function gap. Therefore, it is important to develop computational methods to accurately predict protein function to fill the gap.
Even though many methods have been developed to use protein sequences as input to predict function, much fewer methods leverage protein
structures in protein function prediction because there was lack of accurate protein structures for most proteins until recently.

Results: We developed TransFun—a method using a transformer-based protein language model and 3D-equivariant graph neural networks to
distill information from both protein sequences and structures to predict protein function. It extracts feature embeddings from protein sequences
using a pre-trained protein language model (ESM) via transfer learning and combines them with 3D structures of proteins predicted by
AlphaFold2 through equivariant graph neural networks. Benchmarked on the CAFA3 test dataset and a new test dataset, TransFun outperforms
several state-of-the-art methods, indicating that the language model and 3D-equivariant graph neural networks are effective methods to leverage
protein sequences and structures to improve protein function prediction. Combining TransFun predictions and sequence similarity-based
predictions can further increase prediction accuracy.

**Availability and implementation:** The source code of TransFun is available at https://github.com/jianlin-cheng/TransFun

